Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Sybil Hart. She's professor
emeritus in the Department of Human Development and Family
Sciences at Texas Tech University. And today we're talking
about her book Attachment and Parent Offspring Conflict. So,
Doctor Hart, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to
everyone. Thank you so much for having me.
So, I mean, tell us first about attachment theory.
What is it and why do you bring it
into the framework you apply in this book, in
this particular case in a book surrounding attachment and
parent offspring conflict.
So we have a long standing interest in the
field of psychology and earlier in psychiatry. Into the
basis of a relationship that appears to be universal,
that is the one between children and mothers. And
it has attached itself to politics and religion. And
culture wars and so it certainly has expanded beyond
our discipline. So if you are somebody who studies,
you know, gravity, it's not like it's a topic
of conversation in everyday life, whereas this relationship is
something that is so pivotal to understanding ourselves that
we have spent a tremendous amount of intellect. Uh,
uh, DEVOTED to understanding where it comes from, what
is it like, how to make it better? When
can it work under what kind of circumstances. So
it's not just any relationship, it's The one that
nobody can avoid. So the theories that started to
enter into sort of the scientific realm were probably
those of Freud. And the interesting part about that
theory was that he understood that babies come into
the world not as a blank state. Even though
there's been very little really good hard scientific evidence
to prove a lot of the ideas, but the
foundational notion that the mother-child relationship is somehow Grounded
in our minds before we even enter into the
world is a really important idea. Now, his idea
was that it came from experience. And that experience
was in utero. So the 9 months of gestation
perhaps gave a baby some idea of what mom
was like, uh, again. A notion that resonates and
still does resonate with a lot of people, writers
and a lot of fiction have kind of sprung
from that idea, but actually, And we have some
evidence that, you know, if the intrauterine environment is
flooded with cortisol because the mother is stressed, it'll
have some kind of an effect on, on children,
but it's, it's a long shot and, and hardly
something that can prove personality or a relationship. So
where do you go from there? Well, the other
thing that Freud talked about was breastfeeding. OK, so
if you're talking about experience, not in utero, the
other experience that would be universal would have been
breastfeeding. And this also resonated. TREMENDOUSLY well, which is
why it's an idea that really hasn't, uh, gone
away, that there's something about that breastfeeding relationship that
is special and unique and Profoundly important to development
and something that happens in, in a way that
if it goes wrong, it's like a permanent disaster.
And again, the problem was, lo and behold, babies
form bonds with people who don't feed them. They
love their dads, they love their grandmothers, they love
all kinds of people. So, and they love people
who don't feed them. The fact is, so it
took away from uh breastfeeding, but that didn't take
away from the idea that there's something pivotal about
this relationship and It, it is one that has
Been written about Um, so much that you can't
help but think there must be more to this
that we need to understand. So he turned to
the newer theories, these were, uh, Bowby's work, and
he said, Well, babies are born with something that
isn't like having a blank slate. It's like there's
something shaped through prehistory that makes this an important
part of a baby's life. And in his mind,
it had to have adaptive value because he understood
from the writing at the time that in order
for some kind of a personality trait to have
evolved, it had to have been adaptive in the
environment that we grew up in, which isn't anything
like the environment we live in today. And so
this came to be the focus on, on, um,
attachment relationships having been formed by a predisposition. That's
based on the adaptive value of forming a relationship
with a caregiver who provides safety, who acts as
a safe haven. And so this was coming out
in the 1970s. So basically, the idea was, well,
if breastfeeding isn't pivotal, it must be something else
that was adaptive, and in his mind, it was
predation. And That idea got sort of expanded a
bit. It wasn't just fear of lions and tigers
and snakes. It could be just environmental hazards, and
this has been the prevailing theory in mainstream psychology
for the last, I don't know. Uh, IT'S getting
to be close to a century now. Mhm. So
that problem. Um, WHICH is really difficult to address.
But from the time of Bowlby's writing, Until now,
a lot has changed. Um, We still think that
there's something about this mother-child relationship that is a
pivotal importance to becoming a human being. And yet
Bowby's theory is one that didn't really explain the
primacy of that relationship. And so in a way,
I found the writing disconnected from my experience. And
I think the experience of of a lot of
women anyway. That you knew there was something special
about this relationship and you couldn't, you couldn't pinpoint
it. If, if you really think that we evolved
this relationship because of its importance to survival by
providing safety from environmental hazards, that anybody can provide
it just like anybody can feed a baby. So
where do mothers come into all of this? Well,
I think I kind of took it personally and
so I kind of ignored it for a while
thinking, you know, you're not being the unbiased scientist,
you're acting like the mother, so take off your
mother hat. And but after a while you think,
no, there's got to be more to it. And
so really it comes to thinking. There's something about
breastfeeding, but maybe it's not breastfeeding. Maybe it's breast
milk. And when you start thinking about it that
way, I'm going to use this analogy even though
some people might find it offensive, but if you
think about sexual behavior, And you think about all
that goes on between men and women in order
to produce a baby, and you think about seminal
fluid. They're entirely different categories of understanding. Different people
study them. They publish in different journals. They talk
about different things. They hardly even ever get together.
There's this group of people and those group of
people. And it became very obvious that these two
features that are both important for procreation. Um, Don't
really have anything to do with one another. And
that was pretty much illustrated when IVF came about.
When IVF came about. It became clear that you
can produce a baby without the behavior. It's that
liquid, that fluid that creates life. And in the
very beginning, I'm old enough to remember when there
was sort of this brouha over the test tube
babies thinking that will they be loving human beings
even though they weren't created in the way babies
have been created forever. And so when you think
about breastfeeding, you really need to think about the
behavior as distinct from the fluid. And then you
start to come up with a theory that starts
to explain why mothers are important. Now, of course,
when Boldby was writing, Uh, there was wet nurses.
Wet nurses were very, very common. This means that
the woman gives birth to the baby, hands the
baby over to this lovely lady who will breastfeed
your baby until your baby is weaned, and then
hand you back the baby. And you know, babies
turned out fine. Well, actually they didn't turn out
so great, but it worked for a lot of
people, a lot of the time. And then came
formula. And in addition came baby food. I mean,
if you were living in a cave 2 million
years ago or even 300,000 years ago when Homo
sapiens came along, you did not have Gerber's baby
food in little jars. You didn't have a blender
to mash up your mashed potatoes and add water.
You Didn't have cereal, you didn't have, you know,
you didn't have a metal fork. I mean, I
don't know what you did to feed a baby.
It wasn't that easy. You're very reliant on breast
milk, and in fact, babies couldn't survive without breast
milk. And so, What we start to understand about
the mother in the ancestral setting is, is that
she was the sole source of breast milk. And
the behavior that yes, anybody could provide, anybody could
hold a baby and, and love a baby and
stimulate and provide all of the things that attachment
theorists have shown us are critical to baby's development.
But in the ancestral environment, it would only be
the mother who could provide enough breast milk to
keep a baby alive.
So in regards to that ancestral environment you are
referring to, there's this concept of the environment of
evolutionary adaptiveness that you also talk about in your
book. So what characterizes this environment, which aspects of
it are the most important for what you explore
in the book?
So I think one of the key features of
that environment that's received a lot of attention is
that these were small clans, 50 people, including children.
Multiple caregiving was the norm. So babies born, there's
the mother, there's the grandmother, there's some aunts, there's
some other children. It's a small, close-knit, tight society.
And the writers who started the anthropologists, um, Margaret
Mead, for instance, who would be studying these environments
that seemed similar, we're looking at these close knit
groupings and seeing how they function, and it really
changed the way we understood relationships and families and
the mother-child relationship. And in a way it created
some kind of conflict. On the one hand you
have the attachment theorists who're saying, OK, this mother-child
relationship is really pivotal to development. On the other
hand, the evolutionary psychologists and anthropologists are saying that
we grew up in a network which was full
of all of these people, and so the mother
was just one among many caregivers, and it sort
of diminished the role of mothers and increased the
role of all of these caregivers. And then there
would be sort of an, an idea of the
way to understand this to ask, OK, which one
is more important? Is it the mother-child relationship or
is it the multiple caregivers and which one came
first and which one is better, and, and how
does this all work? And so this actually created
a fair amount of conflict between these two settings,
um. Because you couldn't quite integrate, how is the
mother important if we arose in an environment where
mothers were not the only caregivers. What I've proposed
is that you can understand breastfeeding not only by
looking at the difference between the behavior versus the
fluid that gets transmitted, the breast milk, but you
can also look at it from the point of
view that it actually sets the stage for a
different kind of interaction to take place. So, the
fact is, newborn babies uh have to be reclining.
They can't consume solid food. If you put solid
food into a newborn baby's mouth, they will either
choke or spit it out. And as it turns
out, that first year is almost exclusively one that
would be characterized by what's called exclusive breastfeeding, meaning
nothing, not even premasticated food, not even water, nothing
enters this baby's mouth except breast milk. So that
really determines who the baby's going to be with.
Once you have a baby that can sit up,
hold up its head, swallow food, you can begin
to feed other foods, soft foods, and even in
the ancestral environment, you could have some source of
protein other than breast milk that could sustain a
baby. And so what it did was it really
organized the different kinds of social relationships that would
evolve if you're only fed by a mother and
you're a baby, and if anybody knows anything about
babies, they're hungry all the time. I mean, like
you try to put them on a schedule that
really doesn't work because after you finish feeding them
like 10 minutes later they're hungry again and so
um they're always with the mother. Now, anybody can
feed them. The solid foods doesn't have to be
provided by the mother, it can be provided by
the grandmother or an aunt or a sibling, or
anybody else. So, This kind of feeding behavior that
is governed by maturation of the infant, meaning the
ability to sit up, hold up the head, swallow
food, actually determines who provides care. And so now
you go from this 1st 9 months. Where babies
are always fed by the mother to the next
2 years where they still require breast milk to
survive. There's no medical care. There's no source of
protein that will do the job. They still require
it, but they don't require it exclusively. And in
fact, their nutritional demands require more than the breast
milk can provide. And so it drives these other
relationships. Now, are these relationships the same? No. There's
a lot of differences between them. And so when
you think about how Breastfeeding and the baby's requirement
for breast milk governed who is the caregiver and
what is that caregiver like. You really come up
with some really interesting kinds of phenomena. One of
them is the fact that a baby born 300,000
years ago in a cave somewhere in Africa, and
you can be a baby born 50,000 years ago
in Siberia. And your 1st 9 months will be
pretty much the same. You're going to get fed
by your mother at her breast with skin to
skin contact and the warmth almost continuously. You can't
walk, you can't even crawl, so you're in her
arms almost all the time, no matter who you
are, no matter where you are, no matter what
epoch you live in. It's extraordinary. Now contrast this
with, OK, the next 2 years, you're still a
baby. You're still sleeping with your mother. You're still
breastfeeding at night, but in the day, anything's possible.
So you might be in Siberia wearing a sealskin
fur, you might be in Africa wearing nothing at
all. You might be fed fish from a stream
or a walrus from the ice pack. You could
be in an environment where you talk all day
to people in an environment where you never talk,
you could be carried all day on somebody's back,
you could be strapped in, you could be anywhere.
Well one thing the anthropologists and the cultural psychologists
have done a great job is showing how diverse
these environments are. And that diversity is such a
contrast with what goes on in the 1st 9
months of life. So, back to the environment evolutionary
adaptiveness, you have an environment that is small, close-knit.
Environment where the mother would be the only source
of breast milk because there aren't a lot of
other women available and if those women are lactating,
they're going to save their milk for their own
babies. So this is a bond that is carved
into our minds over millions of years of evolution
that that first year is the year you spend
in your mother's arms. Contrast with what happens after
that where you better be flexible and adaptive and
able to socialize with all the different demands of
every single environment. So it's not OK to say
which is better or which is more important. They
just work in different ways. If the mother-child relationship
is very much based on survival, I mean that.
You can't live without your mother. She is irreplaceable.
Change that to the next 2 years where you
have some control. Maybe you want to play with
this person. Oh, you're hungry and tired, you're going
to go to that person. Oh, but that person's
a hunter who just came back with food, so
you're going to go to him. And now you're
learning how to navigate this complex environment, and on
top of that, what you have is competition. So
your 1st 9 months, your first year, You're not
only fed by mother, but you're the only baby
fed by mother. You are the world to her.
Guess what? Times change. Those other babies also want
to get care from all of those alo maternal
caregivers, and now you're in competition. One is going
to be cuter, one is faster, one is clever,
one is hungrier, one is sicker. Who knows what
you're competing with. There might be environments where there's
lots of babies, there might be environments where there's
very few babies, who knows? It could be anything,
but You are not the privileged child that you
were in your first year. And so that carves
out a whole different set of Um, capacities that
will advantage a toddler, and they're very different from
the ones that advantage a newborn baby.
So, what would you say are the main evolutionary
pressures that infants go through in their 1st 3
years of life? And I know that a big
one has to do with infant mortality and uh
Different causes of infant mortality. So tell us more
about that.
So one of the things, um, since the time
of Bowby's writing, I mean, these paleoanthropologists have done
an amazing job of figuring out life expectancy. Who
were the people who survived, how long did they
survive, and what killed them? Boy didn't have that
information. And what we have is an idea of
how, what age people died, um, because the bones
and teeth. Can provide that information. So it It
is sort of clear, um, infancy would have been
uh responsible for a tremendous proportion of the deaths
that took place. That's an important kind of, uh,
fact that pretty much is indisputable. What's less clear
is exactly how they died. Um, THE soft tissue
isn't present anymore. And so you just have to
um do your best guess. And I, I, you
know, I do this in humility, maybe, maybe somebody
will say that, you know, there were environmental hazards
that were responsible for evolutionary pressures. um, BUT if
you look at the, the environments that are closest
to the ones that we involved in, and there's
less and less of them. It is not environmental
hazards. It's disease, and, um, disease, most people think
of disease as something separate from nutrition. There's hunger
and there's disease, and they're different. They're actually one
topic, so that it is possible for a child
to survive tuberculosis without antibiotics, but it'll be a
well-fed child, a hungry child, a starving child will
not. And so you start to understand, um, again,
so much has been uh shown relating to breast
milk that it provides not just nutrition. But its
resistance to disease and the infant's ability to fight
off disease is far from mature until about 3
years. And so there's, there's good reason to think
that the evolutionary pressures that were of greatest significance,
the ones that are responsible for half of children
dying, were the ones responsible for deaths in children
under 3 years of age. And they had to
be relating to disease, and disease was relating to
hunger and malnutrition or undernutrition. And so there's, there's
a very strong argument that I made and I,
I think that it will be supported, that the
main um evolutionary pressure was not from environmental hazards,
it was from basically toxins in the environment. And
undernutrition, um, it's a sobering way of understanding how
harsh the environment was. One of the things certainly
I learned in in writing this book was just
delving into the literature on undernutrition and uche or
core and how closely that's relating. To the topic
of breast spacing, breastfeeding, premature weeding, the introduction of
formula, and a number of factors. That play a
tremendous role in being responsible for infant mortality. And
so the pressures that existed then, I think, are
still the pressures that exist now. Uh, WE have
better ways of treating them. Um, THEY can be
reversed if there's care. Um But sometimes you just
wonder how How babies survived at all. When, when
you read about, you know, you landed up in,
uh, OK, I'm originally Canadian. I mean, I understand
cold weather really well, you know, how did you
raise a baby, you know, 30,000 years ago in
Siberia and cross the Bering Strait? I mean, how
did that even happen? Um, SO the environment was
harsh, and that harshness in and of itself. Created
barriers to nutrition, which created barriers to health. And
it's not as sexy as, you know, lions and
tigers, but in a way you can understand how,
you know, the theories that were written were written
by men, and what men feared was predation and
lions and tigers. But you know, babies didn't really
worry about lions and tigers or even snakes because
you have to be on the ground to encounter
a snake, and they weren't on the ground. Usually
they were carried. I mean, some would have been
laid on the ground, would have encountered snakes, but
the ever present pressure that I think you can't
get away from, regardless of whether you were in
the Sahara Desert or in Siberia. Under nutrition.
Mhm. But there's also the risk factor of a
closed birth spacing, right? And that perhaps ties to
something that you mentioned earlier when it comes to
the infant potentially having to share resources, maybe some
also nutritional resources with other infants.
Correct. So we have a literature that talks quite
a bit in evolutionary psychology about the need for
infanticide. I mean, if you didn't have birth control,
uh, you cannot terminate a pregnancy, so you give
birth to this baby and then you, you sacrifice
this baby. Most of the time, this was an
imperative of sad, difficult, regrettable imperative. And it would
happen generally because a mother felt she could not
sustain this child. It would also happen because the
child was deformed in some way and didn't have
a chance of surviving, even if it was properly
fed. So you have studies which show that if,
if a mother gave birth to twins, one would
be sacrificed. The idea being, it's a very, very
harsh environment when it comes to nutrition, mothers have
enough to sustain only one child. And, you know,
I write also about this 9-month period, that first
year, when you're reliant on breast milk, and it's
an important 9 months. You have attachment, clear-cut attachment
at 9 months. You have mobility at 9. Months
you have cognitive development, joint attention available at 9
months. What else happens at 9 months? The possibility
of the birth of a sibling. This would be
the greatest tragedy for a child to encounter. Now
you have to share your mother. And it's impossible
for this poor woman to really feed two children,
so she's going to choose one. Now, it's really
when I, you know, I used to write a
lot about jealousy, and some people would say, well,
you know, I don't see it these days. I
mean, my kids get along with one another. It's
not a matter of life and death. If you
have another child, you can have twins and they'll
both be fine. You can hire a nanny, you
can breastfeed both, you can put formula, they'll live.
Maybe it won't be the perfect environment. And maybe
you'll be a little bit exhausted and so exhausted
you don't even remember it, but the babies will
live. We're talking in an environment where it was
a matter of life and death. So the birth
of a sibling was a matter of life or
death. The mother could also be impacted, meaning that
if the interbirth interval is something less than 2
years, this mother's chance of surviving childbirth is not
good. So maternal mortality meant infant mortality because if
the mother dies, the toddler dies. So, obviously, the,
the conditions where you have to find a way
to encourage birth spacing are of paramount importance to
the survival of the species. One of the interesting,
um, literatures that I, I ran into, um, Talked
about the explosion, the population explosion that happened around
9000 years ago when agrarian villages started to be
formed. And so in these villages, the populations would
expand. Uh, YOU could find wet nurses, you could
find animal husbandry, you could have goat milk or
cow's milk or maybe some other kind of milk.
And you would think that, oh, all of these
great things happened. It was an advance because everybody
became specialized, some people did this, some people did
that. I mean, it gave birth to the society
that we are in today, and we live more
like that than we do living like in caves.
Oh, but the infant mortality rate went down. Why
would that happen? Well, it went down because birth
spacing was no longer regulated. By the, the 3
years of breastfeeding that had been compulsory pretty much.
It was compulsory because your baby didn't have teeth.
My mothers didn't know that the baby required breast
milk for nutrition. She might not know that, you
know, passive resistance to disease, uh, doesn't really work
very well. Uh, um, UNLESS you breastfeed, but, um,
they go teeth. Oh, the baby has teeth, you
can chew the food, you really need molars cause
you don't have the blender, you don't have a
metal fork, you know, pounding something with a stone
really doesn't work as well as what we have
available today. So you really have to breastfeed for
3 years now. You have these villages. You have
other sources of breast milk, wet nurses, cow's milk.
You have villages, they start to grow grains and
grains can be cooked and mashed up into something
soft that you can feed a baby, and so
they would breastfeed for less than 3 years, not
because they were lazy, but because the, the, the
calories that are required are extraordinary, greater than for,
uh, pregnancy. So if you're breastfeeding a 2 year
old, it's taking a lot of calories out of
you, and, yes, it's taking up a lot of
time and energy that you can give to somebody
else to do and now you're free to. Birth
rate exploded, population exploded, but the infant mortality rate
actually went up. So having, um, birth spacing is
crucial to survival of children and to women. And
in most of these literatures, when you open up
the books on infant mortality in some of the
really harsh environments that exist today, public health is
almost exclusively about what, birth control, birth spacing, breastfeeding.
Um, Gates Foundation funded a large number of studies,
and they talk about the 1st 1000 days, that
is pregnancy, first year and second year. So the
epidemiologists would, you know, the literatures don't really connect
really perfectly well. The epidemiologists would talk about infancy
is 0 to 12 months. And then they have
this early childhood 12 months to 5 years, but
really that barrier at 12 months is not a
good one. It's really, it should be 24 months,
and these 1st 1000 days goes up to that
second birthday, meaning that your chances of you are
incredibly delicate up until that time. After that, you
are somewhat more robust up until the age of
5, so mortality is high up until 5, but
the highest rates are in the 1st 2 years,
and the second year is as high as the
first year but for different reasons. For the first
year, it's usually in the first few months after
childbirth and their birth complications. From then through to
the 2nd birthday, it is about nutrition. And for
the mother, it's about the just the energetic burden
of breastfeeding while being pregnant, which is too much
for women in these very, very harsh environments. So
we understand a lot about birth spacing, not just
um. A question about will the kids get along
with one another. It's really a matter of survival.
And really if it's not a matter of survival,
there are plenty of families with kids who were
born 1 year apart or 2 years apart, or
even twins, and they're just fine. We live in
a very different environment. There are many substitutes for
breast milk, and everything else that breastfeeding would provide,
which is the loving attentive care, can be provided
by caregivers, nannies, babysitters, relatives, fathers, you name it.
It's, it's a very flexible. IN that respect.
So let me ask you now a question that
I think will also serve as a sort of
segue into the topic of parent offspring conflict here.
Um, WHAT kinds of behaviors on the part of
infants serve to protect them against the risks we've
talked about here, like, for example, under nutrition, close
birth spacing, and so on.
So this is um Let me digress for a
minute. Um, WHEN I was a child living in
a multilingual environment, I would be surprised if you
sneezed and you were English, you'd say bless you,
and if you sneezed and you spoke German, it's
gesundheit, which means health. They don't translate, um, and
this is that just was sort of peculiar to
me. And so all I could take from that
is two people are talking about the same event,
but And they It's an important event. It's not
a random event. They don't say something when you
cough or when you hiccup, only when you sneeze.
Why would that be? Oh, there's something about this.
So parent offspring conflict and attachment behavior and sibling
rivalry are actually talking about the same kind of
event where separation between the mother and the child
is the crux of the dilemma. And the attachment
theorists look at it very much from the point
of view of the child. The child demonstrates protest
behavior, separation protest, jealousy protest. They understand it as
being behavior that is necessary to keep the mother
from leaving. And there's a vast body of literature
on why it happens, how it happens, when it
happens, what are, what do we know about the
different ways in which it happens? Do they show
resistance? Are they especially feisty? Are they more passive?
Are they male? Are they female? Do they live
in in group environments, and individual environments? Are they
in daycare? Are they not? It's like all this
information about what happens when the mother leaves. Not
so much attention to why the mother leaves. Why
the mother leaves would be something that Bowby saw
as an atypical event, because in his environment it
was. It was either what he wrote about where
it was either a war broke out and we're
shipping our children off to the countryside where we
think it'll be safer for them, which is traumatic
for the mothers and for the children. Or somebody's
in the hospital, which is also traumatic for the
mothers and babies. These are atypical events, they don't
happen in a normal environment. Or he's, well these's
early work was uh dealing with a lot of
psychopathology. And so uh it would be atypical. These
were mothers who were criminals, they're on drugs. Nowhere
was it seen as something that happens as a
rather typical, inevitable, possibly even adaptive kind of activity.
So now you're talking about parent and offspring conflict.
So it's taken very much from the point of
where It's a social environment. Other people help you.
You help these other people. You have to take
care of your other children. You have a partner.
You have other demands. People took care of you
when you were pregnant and throwing up for the
1st 3 months. Now you have to take care
of them. Your baby isn't the only child in
the world. You have other obligations, and you have
to navigate that in a way. That is unavoidable
and perhaps in a way that is as sensitive
and tactful as it can possibly be. And after
all, there are other caregivers in the environment, so
it shouldn't be so bad because there's dad and
the grandmother and other children. So it's seen as
a typical event. It might even be an adaptive
event from my point of view, but let's just
go back to this. So here's two different ways
of looking at the same thing and how do
you put it together so that you can see
how they actually are talking about the same thing
that the attachment theories really aren't recognizing why mother's
doing what she's doing in a way that could
possibly make sense. And uh Trivers was talking about
parent and offspringing conflict as the child just Uh,
demonstrating and a psychological weapon, so which it kind
of is, and that's as much as he had
to say and nobody had anything more to say.
It's a weapon you target the mom and mom
caves, if you're lucky and cave, you know, if
you weaponize it enough, so she' care. Uh, SO
how do you put these together? Well, you put
it together simply by understanding they're both right, that
yes, others would leave, it's adaptive, it's appropriate behavior.
On the other hand, the psychological weapon is actually
attachment behavior. Attachment behavior would not have happened if
mothers didn't leave. Otherwise, why would you protest if
you simply say, Oh, Mummy, I'm hungry right now.
You may feed me. That if that was enough,
that's what babies would have done because actually it's
really exhausting for a baby to scream and cry
and demonstrate the psychological weapon known as attachment behavior.
Wouldn't you rather just simply, you know, wave and
say feed me? And of course, um, The idea
is that the babies who demonstrated the most vigorously
were the ones who survived. If they hadn't. They
wouldn't bring her back. If they didn't bring her
back, they got really, really hungry, and if they
got really hungry, they also got really sick. So
they had to demonstrate this behavior, and they wouldn't
have done it. If the mothers had said, oh,
I'll just stop all my other obligations and stay
here and feed you all day until you're 12
years old, that's just never going to happen. So
the attachment system is a system that in another
body of literature can almost be viewed as the
terrible twos or a sibling rivalry. There's many ways
of looking at it, and they're all really talking
about the same thing, meaning I didn't get enough
from money and the terrible twos. Attachment behavior, the
psychological weapon, they're all talking about the same thing.
What babies have to do to retain access to
that caregiver. In the environment of evolutionary adaptiveness. You
know, they would protest and there's many, many descriptions
of that behavior, very colorful descriptions on like that,
but you live in an environment where there's multiple
caregivers available and so usually you get over it
and you find out that the first few days
of daycare that are a little bit upsetting, but
after all, they're not so bad because this daycare
centers kind of fun, the teachers are nice, the
kids are fun to be with, and so they,
they kind of adapt. Um, IF protest behavior was
pathology, you would find that. So it's adaptive behavior.
It's just not pleasant behavior, but they're really talking
about the same thing, much as you're talking about,
you know, gesundheit versus bless you when somebody sneezes.
They're just pinpointing it from a different sort of
angle. And so when mothers see it. SIBLING rivalry,
uh, and evolutionary psychologists talk about a psychological weapon,
and attachment theorists talk about protest behavior, you know,
there's, there's shades of it. And what the attachment
theorists have really done a great job of is
saying there's ways of expressing this that are adaptive.
When we used to do research on jealousy protest,
you, you just see a range of behavior that
is awesome. And the most normal, the one. You
know, approach Mother Wine and cling. It's like they
all went to the United Nations and agreed. Approach
Mother Wine and cling, we'll get what we want.
You'll have a subset, and they are different, and
they have a repertoire that you really need to
pay attention to. They're the kids who just freeze
on the spot. There are the kids who Do
nothing until the mother comes back, and then they
throw a major temper tantrum. And you have the
kids who are, are just inconsolable once the mother
comes back. There's just any kind of behavior. And
so the way to understand this jealousy is really
to understand the way we understand attachment behavior, but
there is a, a way of expressing protest behavior
that is normal, adaptive, and a sign that the
child is well adjusted, and there are these other
behaviors. That are really cause for concern. So, well,
they've done a very good job of refining the
construct of the psychological weapon and say, OK. Deployed
this way, they work, they make sense, they're under
control, they're well regulated, this child will be fine.
Even though it's negative, this child will be fine.
And then you have these other behaviors, I mean.
If a child clings to the experimenter rather than
the mother who's holding the other baby, it's not
a good sign. Almost invariably when you see that
it's a child with a depressed mother, and they
need help. So you know, you benefit tremendously from
both of these views and from the evolutionary psychologists
who talk about the trade-offs. They're just being realistic.
They're not mother bashing because she left her child.
They're saying this is the environment that we live
in. Mothers have to divide up their energy. There
are other caregivers, and babies need to learn how
to navigate a social environment where they deal with
people other than mummy.
And I mean, do we have a good understanding
of the factors that explain the development of those
maladaptive behaviors you mentioned there?
Uh, YEAH, I mean, we have, um, So you
have mothers leaving because, you know, a war broke
out, somebody's in the hospital, uh, and you have
other conditions where it's linked with maternal psychopathology. And
if you can pinpoint the child behavior. Just statistically
you could say this is abnormal statistically. And then
you take that group and you say, OK, tell
me about their environment. You will end up saying,
tell me about their mothers. There might be more
in their environment, and often there is, but the
key thing for a very young baby will be,
tell us about these mothers. And what you find
is a lot of maternal psychopathology, a lot of
postpartum depression, uh, drug, alcohol use, poverty that exacerbates
every problem that you ever had. Uh, LACK of
social support. I mean, we have a large literature
on that. What we don't have. IS a literature
on how breastfeeding actually feeds into this. So If
breast milk is important for infant health, What does
milk production What does breastfeeding behavior do for mothers?
And we really don't have the full answer to
that. There is some evidence that there's a protective
influence. Um, BUT we don't fully recognize. So yes,
mothers on some combination of drugs, alcohol, depression, you
can say, OK, these children, we understand, you know,
what's going on. So the next question becomes, OK,
so what can you do about this? How can
you Prevent it? How can you? Modify it And
so there's always a question of what does, what
does breastfeeding do for this? Um, We don't have
a very clear answer. There's some sense that even
though the breast milk consumption has nothing to do
with attachment in babies, it's the behavior. In mothers,
milk production sets up a very different set of
hormones that's, I mean, it's like being pregnant, you're
different. And there's some sense that it has some
kind of protective effect. Does that mean all mothers
need to breastfeed? No. Does it mean that if
a mother is in a high risk situation, somehow
that profile, that endocrine profile of lactogenesis and lactation
would somehow change the way the mother reacts to
becoming a mother and caring for a child? It's
possible. Mhm.
So, uh, and how about uh fathers? I mean,
because in our own species, particularly compared to uh
to our close, closest primate relatives, um, apparently, human
males tend to invest more heavily into their offspring.
So, I mean, Uh, what, what is the role
that fathers might play here and, uh, I mean,
do they matter when it comes to exploring this
issue of attachment and parent offspring conflict?
So, in an environment where Sustenance can be provided
by anyone. That means it does not depend on
the mother breastfeeding. In an environment where you have
decent healthcare systems, where if a child does get
sick, you go to the doctor and they probably
get antibiotics and they'll be just fine. So we
live in an environment where fathers are as important
as mothers, and these roles have changed tremendously on
it. Look at young men now and I think
about my father, boy, they're different species. So, uh,
the younger men have started to realize women are
changing. They're going to work even though they have
young babies, even while they're pregnant, and men are
picking up where they feel like there's a void
for them and a lot of them enjoy it
a lot. If you think about how we evolved,
I'm not so sure men were that relevant to
caring for babies, and I think that the, the,
the love relationship between infant and mother and infant
and other caregivers, if we had to think about
the evolved basis of that love relationship, it's different.
That not one isn't better than the other, but
they're just different. If that mother-child relationship was the
one that was really pivotal to survival and the
infant caregiver relationship was one where the baby had
more agency and who they chose to be with.
Then it's the one where they had to use
and develop some kind of social skills and to
have some kind of flexibility so they know how
to navigate this environment and maybe they seek out
their fathers and fathers felt as though they contribute
because they've been sought out. Uh, IT sort of
creates not one being more important, but just different.
And I would say that to the extent that
we can characterize that mother-infant relationship because it was
so, I mean, it was so ubiquitous in the
very same way wherever you were on the planet
versus that father relationship which would have varied tremendously
depending upon where you were, uh, it's so it's
harder to characterize that relationship. But it's just as
important because without those social skills, I mean we
would indulge our babies forever. And they have to
learn that to function in a society. And so
it's just a different kind of love relationship. One
of the problems of attachment theory and in all
theories is, is that you're sort of stuck with
this word love, you know, when Bowby came up
with attachment and, and Ainsworth is saying, you know,
it's just another word for love. It's, you're trying
to come up with other words. And why? Because
you really need to find a way to refine
this construct and different languages, you know, my Japanese
colleague would talk about Ama. I mean, there's just
different words that we use to talk about love
and now we're just sort of constrained by, OK,
it's attachment, OK, it's love. OK, so what is
it? Well, we don't have the words and when
you don't have the words, it becomes harder to
describe, but I think that My hope would be
that as we start to appreciate the father-child relationship,
we don't compare it to the mother-child relationship, we
just say this evolved in a different way and
maybe if we understand the context in which it
evolved, we will understand it. In a way that
is much more refined and maybe we'll even come
up with words that are better than the ones
that we have now. One of the other things
that always amused me with language, it was English
has like and love. French does not. And other
languages don't either. And so like, well, what is
it? Like, do only English people love? I mean,
it was just so confusing for me, but it
still leaves me with a sense of Are they
just different in degree? Or are they just different?
And um I don't have an answer to that,
but I wish we had more words. um, IN
any case, to answer your question, I think the
evolved basis of the father infant. Friendship will come
to light if we Consider it as having evolved
in a different context.
So let me just ask you then one last
question. You mentioned earlier how love relationships with mothers
differ from those with non-maternal caregivers, but in what
ways exactly? I mean, do
we? In the present day setting, they don't. OK.
Just say that they evolved. In a different capacity
and so the mother-child relationship and the caregiver relationship
now really would be indistinguishable. The fact that they
evolved in a different context might suggest that there's
something different about them, but we have not determined.
You can't do a study today and find what
that difference is. It's, it's not as though the
mother is irreplaceable because she's not.
Right. Right. So, the book is again attachment and
parent offspring conflict. I'm leaving a link to it
in the description of the interview. And Doctor Hart,
just before we go, apart from the book, are
there any places on the internet where people can
find your work?
Um, THERE'S a number of publications in the scientific
literature, a couple of books, but I must admit
I haven't done a lot of videos, so this
would be the one.
OK, great. So thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a real pleasure to talk with you. Thank
you. Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview
until the end. If you liked it, please share
it, leave a like and hit the subscription button.
The show is brought to you by Nights Learning
and Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com
and also please consider supporting the show on Patreon
or PayPal. I would also like to give a
huge thank you to my main patrons and PayPal
supporters Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches
Olaf, Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matter Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs Colin Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearrauirrumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallidriei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Free Francaortolotti Gabriel
Ponorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings,
David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon,
Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian
Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.